JSON-ROA
========

JSON-ROA - a JSON extension for resource and relation oriented architectures providing explorable APIs for humans and machines.

The JSON-ROA specification is not yet finished and thus 
_BETA_.

Objectives and Properties 
-------------------------

### For RESTful HTTP 

JSON-ROA is well suited for API build with REST in mind.

### Unobtrusive

JSON-ROA is designed to interfere as minimal as possible with the JSON
structure. Support for existing RESTful APIs can added easily without
breaking existing clients. 

### Simplicity 

JSON-ROA does a few things very well, at least much better than the existing
proposals we found elsewhere. It favors simplicity over excessive flexibility.
You might want to take a look at [JSON-LD](http://json-ld.org/) (which is
actually pretty good) if you are looking for something alike. However, such
flexibility comes with the price of complexity. 

### For Humans

We believe that there is value in providing tools such that humans can
understand a API quickly and naturally. JSON-ROA features [The JSON-ROA
Browser](/browser/index.html) to explore APIs. 

### For Programmers 

JSON-ROA is designed such that clients can be programmed with little
effort and minimal risk of getting it wrong. 



Differentiation
---------------

Constraints can be liberating. JSON-ROA does not support or discourages
some practices deliberately. If you planing on doing much of the likes
below we recommend to look somewhere else. 

-   JSON-ROA does not support RPC style usage of HTTP very well.

-   If your API is not resource oriented you might find yourself
    fighting JSON-ROA.


